# On the origins of procrastination

## A journey to Mount Celeste

In 2018, an Indy game was released named Celeste, and is in my humble opinion an absolute piece of art. **Warning: this section contains important spoilers on the story of Celeste**. Celeste is what is called a platformer game, that is a distant descendant of Super Mario Bros. Celeste is also a hard game, and by hard I mean wickedly, wickedly hard. The story is set in a Mountain, called Mount Celeste, and the main character, named Madeline - _you_, decided to climb Mountain Celeste. Her motivation for attempting the climb is unclear, but she is pretty intent on doing it. As we quickly discover in the game, Madeline does suffer from pretty severe anxiety.  Madeline is handicapped by her inner struggles, but she is also courageous and starts climbing the mountain, alone. In the first scene, Madeline meets a bird who delivers a powerful message to her: _you can do this_.

Fairly early in the game, Madeline runs into a most peculiar incident. She finds a spooky mirror, and her reflection jumps out of the mirror and starts attacking her. Madeline just met her **inner self**. But she does not know yet what she is dealing with. The first instinct of Madeline is to fight back her inner self. She hurts her. She runs away for her. Like literally, because it is a video game, and the inner self jumped out of the mirror, so it is actually possible. And the inner self fights back, because the inner self does **not** want to climb Mount Celeste.

This conflict between Madeline and her inner self eventually culminates into a full blown panic attack. Madeline will need to practice a breathing exercise, masterfully incarnated as a side-game where the players controls a feather in the wind, in order to regain her footing. Madeline makes very little progress climbing Mount Celeste while fighting her inner self like that.

Madeline will eventually start talking to her inner self. She will come to realize how scared, and how insecure her inner self is. Instead of silencing and avoiding her inner self, she will listen to her, encourage her, and work with her. Once again, this process is incarnated inside the game with beautiful play scenes where the player needs to control both Madeline and her inner self collaborating to complete levels. This last bit does not matter for what I have to say about procrastination, but I just wanted to emphasize once more how much of a gem this game truly is.

Eventually, Madeline completes every level, and reaches the summit of the mountain. The mountain is an obvious metaphor for any kind of hard projects. And _you, too, can do this_. Chances are, your journey may look a lot like Madeline's.

## The `inner self`, the `it` and the `spirit animal`

Freud made one thing clear: humans are not rationale creatures. Our emotions and our subconscious drive our decisions as much, possibly more, than our intellect. Freud proposed to distinguish `me` - which is who we consciously perceive to be - from `it` - an aggregate of instincts and emotions. My ongoing theory is that the `it` is better conceived as an independent entity, very much like Madeline's `inner self`, with a will and personality of their own. Some indigenous cultures incorporated the idea of a `spirit animal`, which would guard over and represent the core of an individual. Although I may not fully comprehend what spirit animals represent in indigenous cultures, I like this image a lot, so from here onward I will speak of `spirit animal` rather than the `it`, or the `inner self`.

## Meet my spirit animal

In the past couple of years I have grown to know my `spirit animal` quite a bit. Really it has been with me all my life. I like to think that I am a rather kind, compassionate individual - I do not like conflict and I like to help people around me. So I say yes to many things. By contrast, my `spirit animal` is quite a bad ass, and selfish. It is very, very hard to force my `spirit animal` to do anything it does not really want to do. And when confronted with behaviors that upset them, they can be ruthless. Something I came to realize is that in many instances, my spirit animals takes over. They got me out of countless bad commitments, and helped me in very tough situations, like when I had to handle cases of misconduct and harassment around me. I am **so grateful** my `spirit animal` is here with me. But in countless situations, my spirit animal has also been a huge pain in the butt.

## Spirit animals and procrastination
So, as I mentioned in the foreword, that little theory of mine on `spirit animals` and procrastination is half baked. I do not pretend that the relationship between people and their `spirit animals` is the main cause, or even a cause, of all procrastination. I am sure there are people out there whose executive functions are simply impaired, preventing them to go through the steps necessary to complete tasks. But in my case, and several I have observed around me, procrastination clearly reflects a lack of communication between themselves and their `spirit animals`.

Let me give you some examples. A friend of mine wants me to go to a bar for drinks with his friends. I reluctantly say **yes**. My spirit animal does not like groups, and I don't really know the friends of that friend. So my `spirit animal` says **no**. But they don't talk, and I don't hear them, or I choose to ignore them. When time comes to go to the party, my `spirit animal` decides to stay home - after all, they never committed to this. Stuck in the same body as my `spirit animal`, I delay the time to go up until it is too late to go. _Fuck, I procrastinated the party_.

Another example. I receive an email requesting to give a seminar as part of a course. Teaching is my duty, and the person making the request is a friend, so I want to say **yes**. But I am not familiar with the subject, and the period of the seminar is not convenient. My `spirit animal` is having none of it, they say **no**. So I am stuck between my "yes" and my `spirit animal`'s no. I do not respond to the email. I instead put it on my to-do list, to "_think about it_". That item will never get done, but will stay on my to-do list for months, up to the point I either receive several reminders - in which case I eventually respond yes and wait to the very last minute to prepare - or so much time has passed that it is more embarrassing to respond than not to respond. I then finally remove the item from my to-do list. _Fuck, I procrastinated the email_.

They are many other things beyond emails and parties which I procrastinate thanks to my `spirit animal`, some quite more serious than that. But I think you got the general idea.

## Meet your spirit animal

If you feel that you could improve your relationship with your `spirit animal`, there are a few tricks that can help. My favorite approach is to _talk to myself_ - and yes it does look and sound really weird. I generally try to either walk or bike to work, and there are long sections where I am alone. I can then comfortably talk to my spirit animal. Most often, they do not respond. But I can guess what their response is, most of the times. Sometimes, the spirit animal takes over my inner speech, and actually talks (but with my voice, if that makes sense and is not too spooky). When it talks, all the spirit animal often has to say is a bunch of very negative things, or insult me. Sometimes, but rarely, the spirit animal talks to say that they are excited about something. In any case, and whether they decide to speak or not, it always feels good when the spirit animal gets to vent a bit.

I sometimes try to directly engage with my `spirit animal` on problematic items of my to-do list. But mostly I don't, because I already know what they think. Talking with them about anything helps us to bond and then I pay more attention to their opinion, more generally, in the future. When my `spirit animal` and me disagree on a task, they are often right. I am lucky that way, they are quite wise, when they are not too anxious.

Another way to connect with your `spirit animal` is meditation. In a way, meditation is a window opened in your spirit animal. But it is possible to direct your meditation specifically towards the inside, and try to feel how your `spirit animal` is doing. This is quite scary and hard. I have only managed to do it a few times.

This next one is not really a trick to develop a relationship with your `spirit animal`, but rather an observation and possibly a warning. I have noticed a few people I know who seem to have fused with their `spirit animal`. They are very impulsive, say no a lot and need to act immediately when they have something to do. They are quite effective, but also ruthless. I don't think it is something you can decide to do, and even if it is I would not suggest doing it. Spirit animals are rough, and our fellow humans deserve more kindness. Unless your `spirit animal` is something like a _fluffy bunny_, I would rather be the one in command, at least most of the times. You can still consult with your `spirit animal`, just not fully fuse with them.

## Enjoy!

Over time, if you develop a bond with your spirit animal, you may get quite good at understanding them, and you two may become quite close. This may help you make decisions in a much more plain, deliberate way. And maybe this will help you not to procrastinate, and even bring much bigger changes too. **I wish you luck**.
